docs/source/precomputed_msas.md, before:

# Precomputed Multiple Sequence Alignments

OpenFold3 can utilize precomputed multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) for making predictions. Generating MSAs offline, separately from the model forward pass is the preferred practise for large batch jobs to avoid the expenditure of GPU resources for MSA creation, which is primarily a CPU-bound operation.

📝  *Note:*
- The documentation for precomputed MSAs is a preliminary version and is currently being worked on. It is a top priority item that will be shared in the next internal release.

## 1. Generating OF3-Style Precomputed MSAs

Documentation and code on how to use our Snakemake pipeline to generate OF3-style precomputed protein MSAs will be provided in the next upcoming internal release. Our RNA MSA generation pipeline will be provided in a later release.

## 2. Precomputed MSA File Format

This section details the format of the MSA files provided by our Snakemake pipeline for generating protein MSAs. MSAs generated with a different method should follow this format:
- `a3m` or `sto`
- first sequence in the MSA must be the query sequence i.e.: the protein sequence for which the structure is to be predicted

Example `a3m` for PDB entry 5k36 chain B:
```
>5k36_B
GPDHMSRLEIYSPEGLRLDGRRWNELRRFESSINTHPHAADGSSYMEQGNNKIITLVKGPKEPRLKSQMDTSKALLNVSVNITKFSKFERSKSSHKNERRVLEIQTSLVRMFEKNVMLNIYPRTVIDIEIHVLEQDGGIMGSLINGITLALIDAGISMFDYISGISVGLYDTTPLLDTNSLEENAMSTVTLGVVGKSEKLSLLLVEDKIPLDRLENVLAIGIAGAHRVRDLMDEELRKHAQKRVSNASAR
>tr|D5G6D5|D5G6D5_TUBMM
---NRPSSHLHKPSSLPSTSHSFlKKLENVPLRNPLTRRPPhRRPSYVEHGNTKVICSVNGPIEPRAASARNSERATVTVDVCFAAFSGTDRKKRG-KSDKRVLEMQSALSRTFATTLLTTLHPRSEVHISLHILSQDGSILATCVNAATLALVDAGVPMSDYVTACTVASYTNpdesgEPLLDMSSAEEMDLPGITLATVGRSDKISLLQLETKVRLERLEGMLAVGIDGCGKIRQLLDGVIREHGNKMARMGAL-
>MGYP001248485810
---TMSRFDFYNSQGLRIDGRRNYELKNFESSLTTTSNFNnfsrnsqSNTTYLQMGQNKILVNIDGPKEPtnANRSRIDQDKAVLDININVTKFSKVNRQVST-NSnnlpDKQTQEWEFEIQKLFEKIIILETYPKSVINVSVTVLQQDGGILASIINCVSIALMNNSIQVYDIVSACSVGIVDQkHYLLDLNHLEEQFLTSGTIAIIGNSSlqniedaNVCLLSLKDIFPLDLLDGFMMIGIKGCNTLKEIMVKQVKDMNINKLIEIQ--
>SAMEA103904984:k141_247917_5
---AGGRIEFLSPEGLRVDGRRPNELRSYRAQLAVIPQA-DGSALFSLGNTTVIATVYGPRDNNNHNSSNTECSINTkIHAAAFSSTTGDRRKagSS-NTDRRLQDWSETVSHTISGVLLHDLFPRTSLDIFVEVLSADGAVLAASINAVSLALVDAGVPMRDPVVALQGVIIREHLLLDGNRLEERAGAPTTLAFTPRNGKIVGVMVDPKYPQHRFQDVCTMLQPHSESVFAHLDSEVirprLKHLYSMLK-----
... _rest of the sequences_ ...
```

Example `sto` for PDB entry 5k36 chain B:
```
# STOCKHOLM 1.0

#=GS MGYP003365344427/1-246   DE [subseq from] FL=1
#=GS MGYP003366480418/1-243   DE [subseq from] FL=1
#=GS MGYP002782847914/1-245   DE [subseq from] FL=1
#=GS MGYP001343290792/1-246   DE [subseq from] FL=1
#=GS MGYP003180110455/28-272  DE [subseq from] FL=1
... _rest of the annotation field_ ...

5k36_2|B|B|PROTEIN               GPDHMSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------SS-I-N--T---------H--------P-------H-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYMEQGN-N-K---I---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--K--E-----P----R-----L----K--
MGYP003365344427/1-246           ----MSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------TS-I-N--T---------H--------P-------H-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---I---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--K--E-----P----R-----L----K--
MGYP003366480418/1-243           ----MSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------SS-I-N--T---------H--------P-------H-----------A--------S------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---I---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--K--E-----P----N-----L----R--
MGYP002782847914/1-245           ----MSRVEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------SA-I-N--T---------H--------P-------H-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---V---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--K--E-----P----T-----L----K--
MGYP001343290792/1-246           ----MSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------CS-I-N--T---------H--------S-------H-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---V---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--Q--E-----P----S-----S----R--
MGYP003180110455/28-272          ----MSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--D------CS-I-N--T---------H--------P-------N-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---I---I---T--L--V--------N------G----P--Q--E-----P----A-----L----R--
... _rest of the sequences_ ...
```

## 3. Precomputed MSA Directory Structure and Specifying Paths in the Inference Query

The MSA pipeline that creates features from precomputed MSAs for OpenFold3 expects the following directory structure:
- MSA files for each protein chain should be separated into per-chain directories; the names of these directories can be arbitrary strings
- MSA files generated by searching the query sequence against specific databases should have the same filename across chain-level directories; the names of these files can be arbitrary strings but need to be provided in the `runner.yml` if different from the OF3-style MSA names. See [Modifying MSA Settings](precomputed_msas.md#4-modifying-msa-settings-for-custom-precomputed-msas) below.

For example, for 3 distinct protein chains each with MGnify and Uniprot alignments:
```
msas/
├── 5k36_B/
│   ├── mgnify_hits.a3m
│   └── uniprot_hits.a3m
├── 5k36_D/
│   ├── mgnify_hits.a3m
│   └── uniprot_hits.a3m
└── 5k36_E/
    ├── mgnify_hits.a3m
    └── uniprot_hits.a3m
```

The data pipeline needs to know which MSA to use for which protein chain. This information is provided by specifying the [paths to the MSAs](input_format.md#L106) for each chain in the inference query set. There are 3 equivalent ways of specifying these paths.

### 3.1. Direct File Paths

The direct paths for all alignments for each chain can be passed into the query.json. In this case, you would specify the main_msa_paths as follows:

```
{
    "queries": {
        "7cnx": {
            "query_name": "7cnx",
            "chains": [
                {
                    "molecule_type": "protein",
                    "chain_ids": [
                        "A",
                        "C"
                    ],
                    "sequence": "MLNSFKLSLQY...",
                    "main_msa_file_paths": [
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/cfdb_uniref30.a3m",
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/mgnify_hits.sto",
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/uniprot_hits.sto",
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/uniref90_hits.sto"
                    ]
                },
                ...
            ],
	        "use_msas": true,
            "use_paired_msas": true,
            "use_main_msas": true
        }
    }
}
```

The names of these files do need to match the msa names provided to the inference dataset pipelines. We will see an example of how to provide these msa database names to the inference dataset by overwriting the values in the runner.json

### 3.2. Folder Containing Alignments per Chain

You may also pass in the directory containing the alignments relevant to the chain. in this case, the contents of the directory should still contain individual files that contain the msa database name.

```
{
    "queries": {
        "7cnx": {
            "query_name": "7cnx",
            "chains": [
                {
                    "molecule_type": "protein",
                    "chain_ids": [
                        "A",
                        "C"
                    ],
                    "sequence": "MLNSFKLSLQY...",
                    "main_msa_file_paths": [
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/",
                    ]
                },
                ...
            ],
			"use_msas": true,
            "use_paired_msas": true,
            "use_main_msas": true
        }
    }
}
```

### 3.3. Compressed NPZ File Containing Contents of All Alignment Files

It is also an option to pass in compressed npz files containing the alignment data above. This is the default way alignments from the ColabFold MSA server are stored.

```
{
    "queries": {
        "7cnx": {
            "query_name": "7cnx",
            "chains": [
                {
                    "molecule_type": "protein",
                    "chain_ids": [
                        "A",
                        "C"
                    ],
                    "sequence": "MLNSFKLSLQY...",
                    "main_msa_file_paths": [
                        "alignments/7cnw_A.npz",
                    ]
                },
                ...
            ],
	        "use_msas": true,
            "use_paired_msas": true,
            "use_main_msas": true
        }
    }
}
```

The compressed, preparsed MSA files can be generated from raw MSA data with the directory and file structure specified above using [this preparsing script](../../scripts/data_preprocessing/preparse_alignments_af3.py). More detailed documentation on use cases for npz files and how to create them will be provided in the next internal release. 

## 4. Modifying MSA Settings for Custom Precomputed MSAs

Specifying MSA databses in the Inference Dataset
The MSASettings are used to specify how the MSA data should be processed into features for the inference pipeline. For example, these settings can be used to tune the number of sequence alignments used from each database, or the number of rows to be used for each database

More details on the MSASettings are coming. Some high level notes on terminology:

Main alignments: These are the alignments for each chain from each database
Paired alignments: For protein multimer complexes with different chains, paired alignments are the combination of alignments across different chains. Multiple combination strategies are possible, but by default, the alignments are paired through concatenation.

How to overwrite the MSA Settings in runner.yml:

It is possible to pass in an update to the MSASettings to match your alignments using the dataset_config_kwargs section in the runner.yml

The example above used alignments with the key names: cfdb_uniref, mgnify_hits, uniprot_hits, uniref90_hits. To indicate that these are the msa databases to be parsed, we can add the following to our runner.yml

```
dataset_config_kwargs:
  msa:
    # specifies the number of alignments to use from each database 
    max_seq_counts:  
      uniref90_hits: 10000
      uniprot_hits: 50000
      cfdb_uniref30: 10000000
      mgnify_hits: 5000
	# specifies which alignments should be used to create the paired alignment 
    msas_to_pair: ["uniprot_hits", "uniprot"]
	# specifies the alignment order
    aln_order:   
      - uniref90_hits
      - cfdb_uniref30
      - mgnify_hits
      - concat_cfdb_uniref100_filtered
```

This runner yaml can be passed as a command line argument to our run_openfold.py command

```
python run_openfold.py predict \
--query_json query_precomputed_full_path.json \
--use_msa_server=False \
--inference_ckpt_path=of3_v14_79-32000_converted.ckpt.pt \
--output_dir=precomputed_prediction_output/ \
--runner_yaml=inference_precomputed.yml 
```

## 5. Chain Deduplication Utility

This section will contain details on how to use the chain representative logic of the MSA pipeline for highly redundant inference datasets, such as screens of a large number of small molecule ligands against the same protein chains or antibodies against the same antigen. Provided in the next internal release.

## 6. Online MSA Pairing from Precomputed MSAs

This section will contain details on the species information and MSA format required by our online MSA pairing algorithm. Provided in the next internal release.

Commit message:

Finish precomputed msa docs initial version.

docs/source/precomputed_msas.md, after:

# Precomputed Multiple Sequence Alignments

OpenFold3 can utilize precomputed multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) for making predictions. Generating MSAs offline, separately from the model forward pass is the preferred practise for large batch jobs to avoid the expenditure of GPU resources for MSA creation, which is primarily a CPU-bound operation.

📝  *Note:*
- The documentation for precomputed MSAs is a preliminary version and is currently being worked on. It is a top priority item that will be shared in the next internal release.

## 1. Generating OF3-Style Precomputed MSAs

Documentation and code on how to use our Snakemake pipeline to generate OF3-style precomputed protein MSAs will be provided in the next upcoming internal release. Our RNA MSA generation pipeline will be provided in a later release.

## 2. Precomputed MSA File Format

This section details the format of the MSA files provided by our Snakemake pipeline for generating protein MSAs. MSAs generated with a different method should follow this format:
- `a3m` or `sto`
- first sequence in the MSA must be the query sequence i.e.: the protein sequence for which the structure is to be predicted

Example `a3m` for PDB entry 5k36 chain B:
```
>5k36_B
GPDHMSRLEIYSPEGLRLDGRRWNELRRFESSINTHPHAADGSSYMEQGNNKIITLVKGPKEPRLKSQMDTSKALLNVSVNITKFSKFERSKSSHKNERRVLEIQTSLVRMFEKNVMLNIYPRTVIDIEIHVLEQDGGIMGSLINGITLALIDAGISMFDYISGISVGLYDTTPLLDTNSLEENAMSTVTLGVVGKSEKLSLLLVEDKIPLDRLENVLAIGIAGAHRVRDLMDEELRKHAQKRVSNASAR
>tr|D5G6D5|D5G6D5_TUBMM
---NRPSSHLHKPSSLPSTSHSFlKKLENVPLRNPLTRRPPhRRPSYVEHGNTKVICSVNGPIEPRAASARNSERATVTVDVCFAAFSGTDRKKRG-KSDKRVLEMQSALSRTFATTLLTTLHPRSEVHISLHILSQDGSILATCVNAATLALVDAGVPMSDYVTACTVASYTNpdesgEPLLDMSSAEEMDLPGITLATVGRSDKISLLQLETKVRLERLEGMLAVGIDGCGKIRQLLDGVIREHGNKMARMGAL-
>MGYP001248485810
---TMSRFDFYNSQGLRIDGRRNYELKNFESSLTTTSNFNnfsrnsqSNTTYLQMGQNKILVNIDGPKEPtnANRSRIDQDKAVLDININVTKFSKVNRQVST-NSnnlpDKQTQEWEFEIQKLFEKIIILETYPKSVINVSVTVLQQDGGILASIINCVSIALMNNSIQVYDIVSACSVGIVDQkHYLLDLNHLEEQFLTSGTIAIIGNSSlqniedaNVCLLSLKDIFPLDLLDGFMMIGIKGCNTLKEIMVKQVKDMNINKLIEIQ--
>SAMEA103904984:k141_247917_5
---AGGRIEFLSPEGLRVDGRRPNELRSYRAQLAVIPQA-DGSALFSLGNTTVIATVYGPRDNNNHNSSNTECSINTkIHAAAFSSTTGDRRKagSS-NTDRRLQDWSETVSHTISGVLLHDLFPRTSLDIFVEVLSADGAVLAASINAVSLALVDAGVPMRDPVVALQGVIIREHLLLDGNRLEERAGAPTTLAFTPRNGKIVGVMVDPKYPQHRFQDVCTMLQPHSESVFAHLDSEVirprLKHLYSMLK-----
... rest of the sequences ...
```

Example `sto` for PDB entry 5k36 chain B:
```
# STOCKHOLM 1.0

#=GS MGYP003365344427/1-246   DE [subseq from] FL=1
#=GS MGYP003366480418/1-243   DE [subseq from] FL=1
#=GS MGYP002782847914/1-245   DE [subseq from] FL=1
#=GS MGYP001343290792/1-246   DE [subseq from] FL=1
#=GS MGYP003180110455/28-272  DE [subseq from] FL=1
... rest of the annotation field ...

5k36_2|B|B|PROTEIN               GPDHMSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------SS-I-N--T---------H--------P-------H-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYMEQGN-N-K---I---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--K--E-----P----R-----L----K--
MGYP003365344427/1-246           ----MSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------TS-I-N--T---------H--------P-------H-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---I---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--K--E-----P----R-----L----K--
MGYP003366480418/1-243           ----MSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------SS-I-N--T---------H--------P-------H-----------A--------S------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---I---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--K--E-----P----N-----L----R--
MGYP002782847914/1-245           ----MSRVEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------SA-I-N--T---------H--------P-------H-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---V---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--K--E-----P----T-----L----K--
MGYP001343290792/1-246           ----MSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--E------CS-I-N--T---------H--------S-------H-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---V---I---T--L--V--------K------G----P--Q--E-----P----S-----S----R--
MGYP003180110455/28-272          ----MSRLEIYSP-EG-L-RLDG-RR-W-NE-LR--RF--D------CS-I-N--T---------H--------P-------N-----------A--------A------D-------GSSYLEQGN-N-K---I---I---T--L--V--------N------G----P--Q--E-----P----A-----L----R--
... rest of the sequences ...
```

## 3. Precomputed MSA Directory Structure and Specifying Paths in the Inference Query

The MSA pipeline that creates features from precomputed MSAs for OpenFold3 expects the following directory structure:
- MSA files for each protein chain should be separated into per-chain directories; the names of these directories can be arbitrary strings
- MSA files generated by searching the query sequence against specific databases should have the same filename across chain-level directories; the names of these files can be arbitrary strings but need to be provided in the `runner.yml` if different from the OF3-style MSA names. See [Modifying MSA Settings](precomputed_msas.md#4-modifying-msa-settings-for-custom-precomputed-msas) below.

For example, for 3 distinct protein chains each with MGnify and Uniprot alignments:
```
msas/
├── 5k36_B/
│   ├── mgnify_hits.a3m
│   └── uniprot_hits.a3m
├── 5k36_D/
│   ├── mgnify_hits.a3m
│   └── uniprot_hits.a3m
└── 5k36_E/
    ├── mgnify_hits.a3m
    └── uniprot_hits.a3m
```

The data pipeline needs to know which MSA to use for which protein chain. This information is provided by specifying the [paths to the MSAs](input_format.md#L106) for each chain in the inference query set. There are 3 equivalent ways of specifying these paths.

### 3.1. Direct File Paths

The direct paths for all alignments for each chain can be passed into the query.json. In this case, you would specify the main_msa_paths as follows:

```
{
    "queries": {
        "7cnx": {
            "query_name": "7cnx",
            "chains": [
                {
                    "molecule_type": "protein",
                    "chain_ids": [
                        "A",
                        "C"
                    ],
                    "sequence": "MLNSFKLSLQY...",
                    "main_msa_file_paths": [
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/cfdb_uniref30.a3m",
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/mgnify_hits.sto",
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/uniprot_hits.sto",
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/uniref90_hits.sto"
                    ]
                },
                ...
            ],
	        "use_msas": true,
            "use_paired_msas": true,
            "use_main_msas": true
        }
    }
}
```

The names of these files do need to match the msa names provided to the inference dataset pipelines. We will see an example of how to provide these msa database names to the inference dataset by overwriting the values in the runner.json

### 3.2. Folder Containing Alignments per Chain

You may also pass in the directory containing the alignments relevant to the chain. in this case, the contents of the directory should still contain individual files that contain the msa database name.

```
{
    "queries": {
        "7cnx": {
            "query_name": "7cnx",
            "chains": [
                {
                    "molecule_type": "protein",
                    "chain_ids": [
                        "A",
                        "C"
                    ],
                    "sequence": "MLNSFKLSLQY...",
                    "main_msa_file_paths": [
                        "alignments/7cnw_A/",
                    ]
                },
                ...
            ],
			"use_msas": true,
            "use_paired_msas": true,
            "use_main_msas": true
        }
    }
}
```

### 3.3. Compressed NPZ File Containing Contents of All Alignment Files

It is also an option to pass in compressed npz files containing the alignment data above. This is the default way alignments from the ColabFold MSA server are stored.

```
{
    "queries": {
        "7cnx": {
            "query_name": "7cnx",
            "chains": [
                {
                    "molecule_type": "protein",
                    "chain_ids": [
                        "A",
                        "C"
                    ],
                    "sequence": "MLNSFKLSLQY...",
                    "main_msa_file_paths": [
                        "alignments/7cnw_A.npz",
                    ]
                },
                ...
            ],
	        "use_msas": true,
            "use_paired_msas": true,
            "use_main_msas": true
        }
    }
}
```

The compressed, preparsed MSA files can be generated from raw MSA data with the directory and file structure specified above using [this preparsing script](../../scripts/data_preprocessing/preparse_alignments_af3.py). More detailed documentation on use cases for npz files and how to create them will be provided in the next internal release. 

## 4. Modifying MSA Settings for Custom Precomputed MSAs

In the inference pipeline, we use the [MSASettings](../../openfold3/projects/of3_all_atom/config/dataset_config_components.py) class to control MSA processing and featurization. 

More details on the MSASettings will be shared in the next internal release. Brief notes on settings that need to be updated when working with custom precomputed alignments are below. 

It is possible to pass in an update to the MSASettings to match your alignments using the dataset_config_kwargs section in the runner.yml, for example:

```
dataset_config_kwargs:
  msa:
    max_seq_counts:  
      uniref90_hits: 10000
      uniprot_hits: 50000
      cfdb_uniref30: 10000000
      mgnify_hits: 5000
    msas_to_pair: ["uniprot_hits", "uniprot"]
    aln_order:   
      - uniref90_hits
      - cfdb_uniref30
      - mgnify_hits
      - concat_cfdb_uniref100_filtered
```

This runner yaml can then be passed as a command line argument to our run_openfold.py command:

```
python run_openfold.py predict \
--query_json query_precomputed_full_path.json \
--use_msa_server=False \
--inference_ckpt_path=of3_v14_79-32000_converted.ckpt.pt \
--output_dir=precomputed_prediction_output/ \
--runner_yaml=inference_precomputed.yml 
```

📝  *Note:*
- The MSASettings do NOT need to be updated when using OF3-style protein MSAs.

The 3 main settings to update are:
1. *`max_seq_counts`*: A dictionary specifying how many sequences to read from each MSA file with the associated name. MSA files whose names are not provided in this dictionary *will not be parsed*. For example, if one wants `uniparc_hits.a3m` MSA files to be parsed, the following field should be specified:

```
dataset_config_kwargs:
  msa:
    max_seq_counts:  
      uniparc_hits: 10000 
```

where the up to the first 10000 sequences will be read from each `uniparc_hits.a3m` file.

2. *`msas_to_pair`*: The list of MSA filenames that contain species information that can be used for online pairing. See the [Online MSA Pairing](precomputed_msas.md#6-online-msa-pairing-from-precomputed-msas) section for details.

3. *`aln_order`*: The order in which to vertically concatenate MSA files for each chain for main MSA features. MSA files whose names are not provided in this list *will not be used*.

## 5. Chain Deduplication Utility

This section will contain details on how to use the chain representative logic of the MSA pipeline for highly redundant inference datasets, such as screens of a large number of small molecule ligands against the same protein chains or antibodies against the same antigen. Provided in the next internal release.

## 6. Online MSA Pairing from Precomputed MSAs

This section will contain details on the species information and MSA format required by our online MSA pairing algorithm. Provided in the next internal release.
